Narrative tricks and techniques
In this lesson I will explain
some tricks and narrative techniques
that can help you
complete your outline.
We already have the viewer in mind
and we can think about
how to make our scheme
more interesting to him.
We started with a scene of a
mother and her son on the beach,
a man was choking and
the boy wanted to save him.
A handsome man appeared
claiming to be a doctor,
saved the man, and the mother
looked at the child with contempt.
After the credits,
this would be the teaser,
before the story begins,
we saw an interrogation room
where a police officer asks Manuel how
he managed to infiltrate the hospital.
What we will see from there
Manuel tells us from the police station.
Manuel moves suspiciously
around the emergency door,
manages to sneak in
when an ambulance arrives,
goes through the corridors,
he goes into a doctor's
office, he puts on a gown there.
A patient enters.
She has to pretend to him and
make him think that he is a doctor.
Then, when he manages
to get rid of the patient,
he sees a woman walking down
the hall and back into the office.
The woman enters the
office and goes to the closet.
We suspect that
Manuel is hiding inside,
but surprise, it's not in the closet.
Then the camera pans and
we see that he's on the ledge
hanging as it can,
waiting there for the doctor to leave.
Finally we had that in the
operating room he will be with pliers
and they will find out.
We'll have to close by going
back to the interrogation room.
where Manuel will finish his
story or give the conclusion
or we will know what has happened,
if it has killed a sick person or what,
because we know that
Manuel is a mobster.
We have that approach.
do the same as me
and review the plot you
build from time to time
to see if there is any error.
Now we will try to complete the scheme
thinking about what a
narrative step is for.
The fundamental
function of a narrative step
is to advance the plot.
Think about if your
plot advances, if it stops,
if it goes slow, if it goes fast.
Maybe you should
remove some narrative step.
I will remove some
unnecessary narrative step.
I have two narrative steps of
Manuel walking through the corridors.
I will remove one of them.
If it were a feature film,
those two steps could be interesting.
But as it is the scheme
of steps of a short film,
we can remember what the great
Cuban filmmaker Eliseo Altunaga said:
"A short film is an arrow
that goes straight to the heart."
Another function of a narrative
step is to introduce a character.
You can think of presenting a
character in a more interesting way.
In my schematic I have a
character that is useless
more than for Manuel
to enter the hospital.
Let's give him a role.
He is the patient who
comes with the ambulance.
Let's make this character a mob boss.
I will say that this
character is a mafia boss
rival of Manuel's band, but I
will do it in a cinematographic way.
Remember that advice that says:
"Cinema should show, not explain."
So that it is known
that he is a mafia boss,
I will show it as follows.
When the ambulance arrives
We will see that the patient is
handcuffed and that two policemen are watching him.
We put it here.
Narrative passages also work
to convey basic
information to the viewer,
so that the viewer is
interested in what we are telling.
This transmission of
information is called exposure.
If you don't give the viewer
information, they won't be interested.
I will tell something more about
this patient handcuffed mob boss.
To meet this character, I will
introduce a new narrative step
which will be in the
patient room of this mobster.
We put it here.
The patient is with the two
police officers who monitor him
and on television they are
giving news of a shooting.
The patient says, "I'm on TV."
This says a lot about the patient.
is almost dying
and yet he appears on TV and
wants to see himself no matter what.
Now I will tell the
viewer who this man is.
We put a tab here.
We move everything around a
bit and put a new tab here.
Is that on
television, after a shooting,
they say "Edu el
palentino was seriously wounded".
This is where we discover that
the man from Palencia is our patient.
To add more narrative steps,
you can ask yourself questions
and answer them with narrative steps.
What does my protagonist want?
What's your objective?
Manuel's objective will
be to kill Edu el Palencia.
I add a new file where
we put that on television
They say that they are looking for the
aggressor of Edu el Palencia, the one who shot him,
who is Manu the
Leonese, who is our Manuel.
another question you can ask
it is what weaknesses the
characters have, what difficulties they face.
We have already seen that Manuel
he will have to pretend to a
sick person that he is a doctor
and that after a little he is saved
that the woman who enters
the consultation sees it.
I could add some revelation for
my character and find out something.
Think about your scheme
Let's see if you can also
find something that happens to it,
having to deal with a problem, etc.
It could be that the outcome was
positive and you changed it to negative
Or otherwise.
In my case, I already
changed the original news
and I made Manuel a mobster.
But why make so many changes?
Why change everything over and over?
One of the most important
reasons is that if you change,
you are doing something original.
However, if your step
scheme is not modified,
then surely you're remembering
something you saw last
week or a few years ago
and not creating something new.
Writers should listen to intuition
in the early stages,
but then we must put it to the
test to surprise the spectators.
We must go further.
We don't have to think about
the viewer's first intuition,
but go to the second
intuition, to the third, to the fourth,
so that what we tell is
surprising for the spectators.
I'll change the ending again.
I will make Manuel not be a mobster.
I'll make the viewer
believe it for a while,
but in the end I will reveal
that he is actually a policeman.
It's been quite a radical change.
so I have to check that
something is not wrong.
With the passing of the
interrogation at the police station
No problem.
They ask Manuel how he
got into the hospital.
The viewer suspects that he is a mobster
and will later discover that he is a policeman.
We'll just have to be
careful when we write the scene
is that he is seen in the
foreground and the police uniform is not seen.
The narrative step
that I must change is this,
when they say that they are looking
for the aggressor, Manu the Leonese,
because it won't be our
Manuel, it won't be any gangster.
We remove it and replace it
because what they actually say
is: "It is feared that they
want to attack the palentino",
who want to attack
again in the hospital.
With this new plot there are two
tabs that no longer make much sense.
One is the operating room.
Manuel about to use the pliers
and discovered in the operating room.
Since we already know that
Manuel is a policeman, not a mobster,
we remove them.
But we have a new problem.
If Manuel is not a
mobster, but a policeman,
Who wants to attack Edu el Palencia?
Let's see it with three of
the best narrative tricks,
suspense, anticipation and surprise.
It seems that things
are falling into place.
We put these two tabs in place.
Everything seems to be going well.
The suspense was already there when
Manuel sees the woman in the hallway,
he hides and the
woman enters the office.
The expectation and anticipation,
when the woman goes to
the closet and opens it.
The viewer fears that the
woman will discover Manuel,
but surprise, Manuel
is not in the closet.
That's when we discover
that Manuel is on the ledge,
holding on as best he can.
I will add a double surprise.
Let's go back to the moment in which
we assume that Manuel is in the closet
when the woman enters the consultation.
We remove the token of the
surprise that Manuel is not in the closet.
We withdraw that the woman leaves.
We remove them to
replace them with others.
The first will be that
the woman opens the closet,
but we won't see the inside yet.
Now we discover that
Manuel is on the ledge hanging,
but we don't know yet
what's in the closet.
Now we find out what's inside.
It is not empty and
Manuel is not there.
What there is is a
woman bound and gagged.
The woman who has entered the
consultation, smiles and closes the cupboard.
Then we discover that
Manuel is hanging from the ledge,
trying to hold on
As this entire scheme of steps will
be in the tone of a very crazy comedy,
we will have to play
when writing the scene
in which Manuel, when he
is holding on to the ledge
and looks in
astonishment towards the closet,
almost fell when
discovering what's inside,
a bound and gagged woman.
Now we know who wants to kill Edu.
It is a false doctor, the
woman who entered the consultation.
so that the viewer
know who is the woman
tied inside the closet,
we will put one more narrative step,
which is when we are in the emergency room,
together with the nurses,
the patient and the policemen,
There is also a doctor.
What I did is called
sowing or "planting".
It's about giving
small clues so that later,
when the viewer sees
the outcome, accept it.
Since the spectator has
seen that a doctor is going
with the nurses and the patient in
the emergency room at the beginning,
when the closet opens,
it's not just any woman,
It is the doctor that we have seen
before entering the emergency room.
Keep in mind that it is almost
always better to give up telling everything
and let the viewer be
the one to connect the dots.
That is precisely what my favorite
director, Ernst Lubitsch, used to say.
Yes, Lubitsch, the one in the painting.
The great director and
screenwriter Billy Wilder
He had a painting
like this in his office.
Billy Wilder had worked
with him and adored him.
When Wilder was making a script,
from time to time he looked at the
painting where it said "how would Lubitsch do it?"
and then it said:
"Perhaps what I am writing
is not worthy of my master."
One of Lubitsch's tips
that Wilder always applied
is the one that says:
"Don't tell the viewer that 2 + 2 = 4.
It is best if you tell the viewer '2'
and later you tell him
'2' and let him do the sum".
That advice is always applied at Pixar.
Going back to my scheme,
instead of explaining how the
fake doctor has replaced the other,
put her in a closet,
tied her up and gagged her,
what we do is show the
doctor at the beginning
in the emergency room when the ambulance
comes in, and then show it in the closet.
With this the viewer already
knows that this was the real doctor
and that the one who put her in the closet is
the one who wants to kill the man from Palencia.
And not only that, in this closet scene
It is also suggested that Manuel is not the
one who wanted to kill the man from Palencia,
he is not a mobster.
So who is Manuel?
The viewer does not yet
know the narrative step
where we find out he's a cop.
We already have a
story here, several scenes,
a bit of crazy, crazy comedy,
in the style of Mel Brooks,
in the style of Gene Wilder,
or that of Blake Edwards
from "The Pink Panther".
Now we have in this scheme of steps
several questions that the viewer asks.
Will Edu die from Palencia?
Will the doctor
achieve her sinister purposes?
Will Manuel manage to prevent
Edu el Palencia from being killed?
If the viewer wonders that,
great, you've created suspense.
Of course, you will have to
answer those questions later.
That is what is called
"pay off", pay off debts.
I will pay my first debt.
We will see if this false doctor
manages to kill the man from Palencia or not.
I will add a new narrative step.
The false doctor prepares
to anesthetize the palentino
and kill him, it is assumed.
He looks at her terrified.
He has recognized her.
It is in a moment of tension.
Will the false doctor be able
to kill the man from Palencia?
To build a step scheme we
have to continually change.
We have to modify, destroy,
add a narrative step that was not
there, remove another that was there.
I have to admit that I
simplified the process,
'Cause if I made it real
With all the destruction and
the change of tokens that there is,
this would be crazy and I
couldn't follow the creative process.
However, you have to be very demanding,
change chips, put others,
turn the story upside down
abandon everything you
believed in and adopt another idea.
Next, we'll continue to
think like a screenwriter,
this time sequentially.